
Agenda
- Work through https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/wg-net/issues/24 and https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/wg-net/issues/35
  - Please read these threads and leave comments in advance of the meeting
  - Goal: arrive at rough consensus for the preliminary vision and structure of the WG
  - I expect this to take most of our meeting time!
- Notes
  - End goal: Have a high level vision for structuring the WG.
    - Arrive at a rough consensus at the end of the meeting
  - 2018 vision
    - What is the scope of the changes? Language or Ecosystem
      - Depends on the end results. 
      - Async foundations involve language change
      - Language changes not scheduled for 2018 shouldn’t be considered.
  - Deployment story valid for this WG?
    - Question of resource prioritization
    - How much work would be accepted to get things like OpenSSL and musl on the official docker image.
    - Ring is a problem
      - A branch started in December is close to allowing multiple versions to be linked? https://github.com/briansmith/ring/pull/619
    - Big companies generally have their own internal base images to build off of.
      - Maybe have docs on how to set it up with an example image.
    - Getting rust to build in a reproducible, secure manner across OSes
    - Important to not just wg-net
  - Strawman proposal: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/wg-net/issues/24#issuecomment-409081766
    - Not included in the strawman:
      - Ecosystem foundations don’t talk about integrating the existing ecosystem with async rust
      - Web foundations is good, but we need a high level story for other use cases
  - Some issues regarding the web context:
    - There’s a lot in terms of the web context, but it doesn’t work together.
    - Unclear decision making interms of low and high level abstractions.
    - Too much concern into the request response paradigms, which ignores other use cases
  - “Web foundations” is intended to focus n the coherence/compat of the web ecosystem.
    - Not sure of the vision for web in rust in general. What does it entail? Components? Web frameworks?
    - There is disconnect between tokio and threads.
    - No coherent story for managing contexts in a generic way.
      - think go contexts, .net execution contexts, jai's implicit context etc.
    - Contexts should work in both async and sync rust code.
  - Some form of example guide for getting started with async IoT in rust with good patterns highlighted.
  - Ecosystem survey: 
    - what’s the approximate scope?
    - If multiple crates cover the same functionality, how should that be handled.
  - Good interoperability between libraries and language elements  are helpful across most if not all of the domains of interests that were mentioned on these issues
    - Web is an important story to get right
    - Having a clear “End to End” goal is important.
  - Focus on documentation.
    - Start building the website (which website)
    - and writing docs for different use cases.
      - The holes in the ecosystem will show up when doing this.
  - Have reasonably clear “final deliverables”
    - websocket support would be a way to address non request-response oriented protocols.
    - Guides as deliverables
      - How to reconcile this with not having official defacto libraries.
      - Should we avoid “picking a winner” by making an official recommendation?
  - Proposed change to the vision:
    - Async foundations
    - IoT/embedded foundations (Focus on networking and not embedded in general)
    - Web foundations
    - Ecosystem pillar can be an open-ended/undirected ecosystem-focused driven by two particular domains of use.
  - Lots of opportunity in the data plane, how should that be addressed?
  - Documentation for different audiences.
    - Quick getting started style guides
    - In-depth understanding of foundational components.
  - It’s a lot more effective to shoot for a rough overall use case rather than trying to do completely open-ended doc/ecosystem work
  - Finish building and shipping async seems like a separate effort
  - A good overview for async deliverables can be gleaned from the contents of https://aturon.github.io/apr/
  - Everything doesn’t need to be end-to-end, but should have a proper deliverable.
  - WG has low level usecases and high level usecases and each is being represented by a concrete example.
  - Strawman proposal for the organizational structure of the WG
    - Have two “point people” for each pillar.
      - They will lead/coordinate 
      - Have two for availability and have different opinions.
    - WG members will gravitate towards one of these main areas of work.
    - Each sub group can work out its own way of setting a more detailed granular vision.
    - Leads will have a regular meeting to help coordinate the different efforts.
    - This is a repetition of the team structure followed in  the Rust project.
  - Leads should be picked by interest and availability.
    - Proposed leads:
    - async foundations: cramertj + MajorBreakfast
      - Formalizing what is already in place.
    - Embedded foundations: Nemo157 + Ikurusa
    - Web foundations: aturon + yoshuawuyts
  - Once the leads are settled, a signup sheet for individual pillars will be available.
  - Should debug/introspection/tooling be it’s own pillar?
    - Should probably flow from the different useases/pillars
    - Very important
  - How much time is required of the lead?
    - Depends on how much help is coming from the sub group itself.
    - leads can also rotate over time.
  - There might be an abundance of interest in web, but embedded might be an issue.
  - What happens next:
    - aturon follows up with the leads to help firm up logistics.
    - He will send an email + a note on how to sign up for sub groups.
      - Fine to do multiple, shift overtime/etc. 
      - Basically a mailing list to make sure the sub group can organize things.
    - We’ll aim for each of the three pillars to flesh out a more concrete picture of their end deliverables over the next week or so.
  - Most likely that the leads will have regular meetings open for anyone to join in.
  - The sub groups should be largely independent in organization but with regular cross-cutting check-ins.
