---
layout: post
title: "Routing and extraction in Tide: a first sketch"
date: 2018-10-16
author: Aaron Turon
---

This post continues the [series on Tide][last-post], sketching a *possible* design for routing and extraction that combines some of the best ideas from frameworks like [Rocket], [Actix], and [Gotham].

[Rocket]: https://rocket.rs/
[Actix]: https://actix.rs/
[Gotham]: https://gotham.rs/

- *Routing* is how the framework maps from an HTTP request to an *endpoint*, i.e. a piece of code intended to handle the request.

- *Extraction* is how an endpoint accesses data from the HTTP request.

The two concerns are usually somewhat coupled, because the extraction strategy shapes the signature of the endpoints that are being routed to. As we'll see in this post, however, the coupling can be extremely loose.

[last-post]:  https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/wg-net/2018/09/11/tide.html

**_Nothing in this post is set in stone!_** 
Rather, this is a sketch of one possible API direction, to 
kick off discussion and collaboration. Please leave your thoughts on the [internals post].

[internals post]: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/routing-and-extraction-in-tide-a-first-sketch/8587

# A simple example

We'll start with a very simple example "app" built on top of the routing and extraction system from this post, and then we'll look at that system in closer detail.

## The data

The app maintains a simple in-memory list of messages:

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
struct Message {
    contents: String,
    author: Option<String>,
    // etc...
}

/// A handle to an in-memory list of messages
#[derive(Clone)]
struct Database { /* ... */ }

impl Database {
    /// Create a handle to an empty database
    fn new() -> Database;

    /// Add a new message, returning its ID
    fn insert(&mut self, msg: Message) -> u64;

    /// Attempt to look up a message by ID
    fn get(&self, id: u64) -> Option<Message>;

    /// Attempt to edit a message; returns `false`
    /// if `id` is not found.
    fn set(&mut self, id: u64, msg: Message) -> bool;
}
```

This tiny API is meant as a stand-in for more complex back ends. The main point of interest is that `Database` is a *handle* to a database, meaning that it is `Clone` (and uses an `Arc` under the hood). We'll see why that's important later on.

## The web API: table of contents

We will build a simple, JSON-based web API for operating on this in-memory database. As per the [last post][last-post], we'll do this in two parts: a high-level "table of contents" showing how to route requests to endpoints, and then lower-level endpoint definitions.

The table of contents for the app is specified via a builder API:

```rust
fn main() {
    // The endpoints will receive a handle to the app state, i.e. a `Database` instance
    let mut app = App::new(Database::new());

    app.at("/message").post(new_message);
    app.at("/message/{}").get(get_message);
    app.at("/message/{}").put(set_message);

    app.serve();
}
```

Posting at `/message` creates a new message, while `/message/{}` allows retrieving and editing existing messages. The `{}` segment matches any single URL segment (not containing a separator). We'll see how to extract the matched data momentarily.

## The web API: endpoint implementation

To finish out the app, we need to implement the endpoint functions we passed into the table of contents. 

### Insertion

Let's start with the `new_message` endpoint:

```rust
async fn new_message(db: AppState<Database>, msg: Json<Message>) -> Display<usize> {    
    db.insert(msg.0)
}
```

First off, we're using `async fn` to write the endpoint.
This feature, currently available on Nightly, allows you to write futures-based code with ease. The function signature is equivalent to:

```rust
fn new_message(db: AppState<Database>, msg: Json<Message>) -> impl Future<Output = Display(u64)>
```

Every endpoint signature has this same form:

- Zero or more arguments, each of which implements the `Extractor` trait. The `Extractor`
  implementation says how the argument data should be extracted from the request. Generally,
  extractors are just wrapper structs with public fields.
- An asynchronous return value that can be transformed into a response (via an `IntoResponse` trait)

For `new_message`, we use two extractors: one to get a handle to the application state
(a `Database`), and another to extract the body (as a json-encoded `Message`).

Within the body of the function, we can use the parameters directly. The extractor wrapper
types implement `Deref` and `DerefMut`, and we can use `.0` to extract the inner object when we 
need ownership:

```rust
    db.insert(msg.0)
```

Finally, we return the identifer of the inserted message, a `Display(u64)` value.
Like `Json`, the `Display` type is a decorator saying to serialize the given value
into a vanilla HTTP 200 with body generated by formattting via the `Display` trait.
In particular, it provides the following impl:

```rust
impl<T: fmt::Display> IntoResponse for Display<T> { ... }
```

### Updates

Next, we'll look at updating an existing message:

```rust
async fn set_message(db: AppState<Database>, id: Path<usize>, msg: Json<Message>) -> Result<(), NotFound> {
    if db.set(id.0, msg.0) {
        Ok(())
    } else {
        Err(NotFound)
    }
}
```

The basic setup here is quite similar to `new_message`. However, for this endpoint we need
to extract the `{}` parameter from the URL. We use the `Path` extractor to say that the 
corresponding URL segment should parse as a `usize` value. Otherwise, the arguments and body
of the function are pretty self-explanatory.

One important detail: the `Result` return value will serialize into a response via the serialization
for the type it contains. Both `()` and `NotFound` serialize to responses with empty bodies, but the former generates a 200 response code, while the latter yields 404.

Note that this way of structuring the return type is just an example. In practice, you'd probably
have a custom app error type with a more sophisticated serialization approach.

### Retrieval

Finally, we can implement retrieval of messages:

```rust
async fn get_message(db: AppState<Database>, id: Path<usize>) -> Result<Json<Message>, NotFound> {
    if let Some(msg) = db.get(id.0) {
        Ok(Json(msg))
    } else {
        Err(NotFound)
    }
}
```

The only twist here is that we're using the `Json` marker in the success case, indicating that
we want to return a 200 response whose body is `Message` serialized via json.

# Digging deeper

Walking through the example app already introduced many of the relevant APIs, but now it's worth
stepping back and seeing a more complete picture, as well as rationale and relationship to existing
Rust web frameworks.

## Design goals

There are a few core goals for the API design being sketched here:

- **Make it very straightforward to understand how URLs map to code**. 
  We do this by making a sharp separation between routing and other concerns (including extraction), 
  and by *limiting the expressive power* of routing.

- **Make extraction and response serialization ergonomic**.
  We do this by leveraging the trait system on both sides.

- **Avoid macros and code generation at the core; prefer simple, "plain Rust" APIs**. While macros can be very powerful, they can also obscure the underlying mechanics of a framework, and lead to hard-to-understand errors when things go wrong. While this is not a hard constraint, achieving the above two goals while using only "plain Rust" is a nice-to-have.

- **Provide a clean mechanism for middleware and configuration**. We'll see later on how the proposed API is well-suited for extensibility and customization.

The design draws ideas liberally from Rocket, Gotham, and Actix-Web, with some new twists of its own. Let's dig in!

## Routing

For routing, to achieve the clarity goals, we follow these principles:

- Separate out routing via a "table of contents" approach.
- Drive endpoint selection *solely* by URL and HTTP method. Other aspects of a request can affect middleware and the behavior of the endpoint, but *not* which endpoint is used.
- No "fallback" in route matching; use match specificity.

At the core of the routing system are several data types:

```rust
/// An application, which houses application state and other top-level concerns.
pub struct App<AppData> { .. }

/// Configures routing within an application. Routers can be nested.
pub struct Router<AppData> { .. }

/// Configures the responses for an application for a particular URL match.
pub struct Resource<AppData> { .. }

/// Embeds a typemap for providing hierarchical configuration of extractors, middleware, and more.
pub struct Config { .. }
```

The app-level and router APIs are straightforward:

```rust
impl<AppData> App<AppData> {
    pub fn new(app_data: AppData) -> App<AppData>;

    /// Access the top-level router for the app.
    pub fn router(&mut self) -> &mut Router<AppData>;

    /// Access the top-level configuration.
    pub fn config(&mut self) -> &mut Config;

    /// Convenience API to add routes directly at the top level.
    pub fn at(&mut self, path: &str) -> &mut Resource<AppData>;

    /// Start up a server instance.
    pub fn serve(&mut self);
}

impl<AppData> Router<AppData> {
    /// Configure the router.
    pub fn config(&mut self) -> &mut Config;

    /// Add a route.
    pub fn at(&mut self, path: &str) -> &mut Resource<AppData>;
}
```

The syntax for routes is very simple: URLs with zero or more `{}` segments, possibly ending in a `*` segment (for matching an arbitrary "rest" of the URL). The `{}` segments hook into the `Path` extractor; each `Path<T>` argument in an endpoint extracts one such segment, in order.

To provide maximum clarity, the router only allows two routes to overlap if one route is *more specific* than the other; the most specific route is prefered. So, for example, the following routes can all coexist:

```rust
"/users/{}"
"/users/{}/help"
"/users/new"
"/users/new/help"
```

and a request at `/users/new` or `/users/new/help` will use the last two routes, respectively.

More generally: routes can share an identical prefix, but at some point must either have segments that don't overlap (e.g. two different fixed strings), or exactly one of the routes must have a `{}` or `*` segment where the other has a fixed string.

Once a route has been given, you get a handle to a `Resource`, which allows mounting endpoints or working with a router nested at that URL:

```rust
impl<AppData> Resource<AppData> {
    pub fn get<T>(&mut self, endpoint: impl Endpoint<AppData, T>) -> &mut Config;
    pub fn put<T>(&mut self, endpoint: impl Endpoint<AppData, T>) -> &mut Config;
    pub fn post<T>(&mut self, endpoint: impl Endpoint<AppData, T>) -> &mut Config;
    pub fn delete<T>(&mut self, endpoint: impl Endpoint<AppData, T>) -> &mut Config;

    pub fn nest(&mut self, impl FnOnce(&mut Router));

    pub fn config(&mut self) -> &mut Config;
}
```

Most of these methods returns a handle to a `Config`, which makes it possible to tweak the configuration at a route or endpoint level. This post won't go into detail on the configuration API, but the idea is that configuration, like middleware, applies in a hierarchical fashion along the routing table of contents. So, app-level configuration provides a global default, which can then be adjusted at each step along the way down a route (or even parts of a route) and an endpoint.

## Endpoints

A route terminates at an endpoint, which is an asynchronous `Request` to `Response` function:

```rust
pub trait Endpoint<AppData, Kind> {
    type Fut: Future<Output = Response> + Send + 'static;
    fn call(&self, state: AppData, req: Request, config: &Config) -> Self::Fut;
}
```

The `Request` and `Response` types here are wrappers around those from the `http` crate; we won't get into that part of the API in too much detail here, since most end-users won't ever work directly with these types.

The endpoint is given a handle to the application state and a reference to the configuration, in addition to ownership of the `Request`.

Note that the `Endpoint` trait has a `Kind` parameter which is not used in the body of the trait. This additional parameter is what makes it possible to *overload* the mounting APIs to work with  a variety of function signatures. In particular, here's a fragment of some of the provided implementations:

```rust
/// A marker structu to avoid overlap
struct Ty<T>(T);

// An endpoint implementation for *zero* extractors.
impl<T, AppData, Fut> Endpoint<AppData, Ty<Fut>> for T
where
    T: Fn() -> Fut,
    F: Future,
    F::Output: IntoResponse,
    // ...

// An endpoint implementation for *one* extractor.
impl<T, AppData, Fut, T0> Endpoint<AppData, (Ty<T0>, Ty<Fut>)> for T
where
    T: Fn(T0) -> Fut,
    T0: Extractor<AppData>,
    Fut: Future,
    Fut::Output: IntoResponse,
    // ...

// An endpoint implementation for *two* extractors.
impl<T, AppData, Fut, T0, T1> Endpoint<AppData, (Ty<T0>, Ty<T1>, Ty<Fut>)> for T
where
    T: Fn(T0, T1) -> Fut,
    T0: Extractor<AppData>,
    T1: Extractor<AppData>,
    Fut: Future,
    Fut::Output: IntoResponse,
    // ...

// and so on...
```

Putting this all together, from the user's perspective **an "endpoint" is any async function where each argument type implements `Extractor` and where the return type implements `IntoResponse`**. This is how we provide an endpoint experience comparable to the one in Rocket (which has a similar setup), *without using macros or code generation*. 

## Extraction

Extractors work similarly to many other Rust frameworks. They are asynchronous functions that extract data from app s tate, configuration, and the request:

```rust
pub trait Extractor<AppData>: Sized {
    type Error: IntoResponse;
    type Fut: Future<Output = Result<Self, Self::Error>> + Send + 'static;
    fn extract(state: AppData, config: &Config, req: &mut Request) -> Self::Fut;
}
```

Note that extractors can fail with an error. Unlike in some frameworks, where this results in rerouting, this API works more like Actix-Web: the error must itself be *directly* convertable to a response, and no further routing is performed. As with Actix-Web, you can use the `Config` object to customize parameters of an extractor, including what kind of error it produces.

Much like with Actix-Web and other frameworks, we can provide a set of prebuilt extractors:

```rust
// These all implement `Extractor`:

pub struct Json<T>(pub T);
pub struct AppState<T>(pub T);
pub struct Path<T>(pub T);
pub struct Glob<T>(pub T);
pub struct Query<T>(pub T);
```

Unlike with Actix-Web and Gotham, if you want to extract multiple `{}` matches in a URL, you do so using *multiple `Path` parameters*, rather than e.g. using a tuple within `Path`.

## Serialization

Finally, an endpoint must return data that is convertable into a response:

```rust
pub trait IntoResponse: Sized {
    type Body: BufStream + Send + 'static;
    fn into_response(self) -> http::Response<Self::Body>;
}
```

The `Body` type here is to allow for streaming response bodies. Otherwise, this setup works identically to Rocket.

# What's next?

In general, this API seems to take some of the most appealing aspects of existing Rust frameworks and consolidate them in a fairly streamlined way. While there are a lot of details elided from this post, it hopefully gives enough of a sketch to spark a [useful discussion][internals post]. I'm eager for feedback on basically any aspect of what's being laid out here.

If feedback is generally positive, there are a couple of next steps that can proceed in parallel:

- While I've prototyped the type system aspects of these APIs, I don't have a working implementation yet. If we want to go forward in something like this direction, I'd love to collaborate with folks to get it working!

- In addition to the APIs spelled out here, I've also put thought into middleware and configuration APIs. So, again assuming we want to head in this direction, the next post will spell out those ideas.

Looking forward to hearing what you think!
